## progress
1. deprecated the duplicates.
1. dumped the DB after (see archive)
1. moving on to quantity, which in STMML, ends up in the unitType. It causes a lot of confusion. I think the quantityExpression table is trying to do too much. you will need a sandbox for this - don't do it in production (yet)
1. created a sandbox with fks set to 'on update cascade' (all fks). mainly for large scale changes to quantities. 
1. normalize quantities (sandbox)
1. reassign some units

## exploring use of quantity expressions.


sql: 
```
SELECT q.name AS "Quantity", b.name AS "Base unit", ex.power 
FROM quantityExpression ex, baseQuantity b, quantity q
WHERE ex.quantityId = q.quantityId and ex.baseQuantityId = b.baseQuantityId
ORDER BY q.name asc, ex.power desc
```
see db_exports/select_quantity_baseUnit_power.csv
 

## quantities:
### summary:
- quantity  = property that can be measured. 
- unit = expressions of dimensions for quantities.

- different quantities can have the same dimensions. eg. mass concentration and mass density are both mass/volume. but 
  - mass concentration is a mixture (thing in the numerator and denominator are different), and 
  - mass density is not (same thing in numerator and denominator).

- Categorical measurements dont have quantities; eg, "red" is a category of colors, for a range of wavelengths. if you were to measure it quantitatively, you'd be reporting (probably) absorbance at some wavelength. 
 
- When a single unit is used by several different quantities; 
  - may be that they are similar but derived differently.
  - may have different entities 

the deriviation (or other complex description) does not belong in a unit dictionary. but example usage would be helpful 
### examples:
Some are pretty straightforward, and have only one set of dimensions. in general, quantities:units is many:many 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concentration#Table_of_concentrations_and_related_quantities

one of wiki's refs (in statement that 'related quants', eg, mass fractions, are NOT concentrations).
http://goldbook.iupac.org/html/C/C01222.html

This is kind of a nice unit list: http://www.gordonengland.co.uk/conversion/sidef.htm
also has some groupings of units, along dimensions (see the conversions page). most of these are fine as is, but we need groupings like this for the biological units. physical units are easy. biological units not (sigh).



# 2018-03-05 - continued this week:
## wacky units and quantities:
some quantities are just plain wrong. explore how they got there for patterns. work in sandbox.

sql for every unit, its quantity and scope: 
```
SELECT q.name AS 'Quantity', u.name AS 'Unit', s.name AS 'Scope'  
FROM   mob_sandbox.quantity q, mob_sandbox.unit u, mob_sandbox.scope s, mob_sandbox.unitScope us
WHERE ( u.quantityId = q.quantityId and us.ScopeId = s.scopeId and us.unitId = u.unitId )
-- AND u.deprecatedTo IS NULL 
-- ORDER BY q.name asc, ex.power desc
```



sql for scopes that have contributed units, and how many:
```
SELECT  s.name AS 'Scope'  , count(*)
FROM   mob_sandbox.scope s, mob_sandbox.unitScope us
WHERE ( us.ScopeId = s.scopeId )
GROUP BY s.name
ORDER BY s.name
```

# 2018-03-19: 
## to do - working in sandbox
working with EML-2.1.0 scope:
1. add quantities, redefine quantities (e.g., flux to rate, where mis-described). consider adding a description column for quantities.
1. add units with consistent spelling
1. deprecate inconsistent to consistent
1. record usage of unit whose quantities you are editing.

- In EML schema, the unit name serves as the referenced id. so it should be OK (from schema POV) to reassign units to different quantities. you have some notes on how units are used in datasets; record these here, because the attribute determines the quantity, not the unit. 
- answer this: does the unit dictionary have to know about all possible quantities?
  - yes: if unitDB quantities are expected to map to measurements. 
    - and there would need to be more added. 
    - some conversions need to know about the entire meaurement, not just the unit)
  - no: if unitDB quantities are just a grouping for dimensions, 
    - in this case, they should probably not be called quantities.
  
But What People Want: is a way to subset a long list of units, and probably the best way is to use the quantity (because they should know something about their measurement already - is it a flux, a count, a concentration...). so going with yes, for now.
  
SQL to return units and quants from EML 2.1: 
```
SELECT q.name AS 'Quantity',u.unitId, u.name AS 'Unit', s.name AS 'Scope'  
FROM   mob_sandbox.quantity q, mob_sandbox.unit u, mob_sandbox.scope s, mob_sandbox.unitScope us
WHERE ( u.quantityId = q.quantityId and us.ScopeId = s.scopeId and us.unitId = u.unitId)
AND s.name LIKE 'EML-2.1%'
ORDER BY q.name
```



## create units for EML 2.2
1. add a new scope for 2.2, (scopeId = 32)
1. add assignments any unit in scope 2.1 is also in scope 2.2
1. add new cleaned up units (est 67, see bulk_uploads dir)
1. assign new units to 2.2
1. deprecate messy units to cleaned (est 67)

code to insert scope-assignments to everything that scoped 2.1. the +4000 is there because the rowId is just an integer. Whoops - clearly I don't work will with mysql or the rationale of auto-increment PKs. If you leave off the id field, the pks are assigned. I find that disturbing, because duplicate rows are so easy to create. 
```
INSERT INTO mob_sandbox.unitScope
SELECT unitScopeId+4000, unitId, 32 FROM mob_sandbox.unitScope
WHERE scopeId = 2;
```
check it: 
```
Select * from mob_sandbox.unitScope
Where scopeId = 32
```


keep for now, not needed. 
```
SELECT u.unitId, u.quantityId, parentSI, siMultiplier,siConstant, deprecatedTo, deprecatedDueTo, u.name, abbreviation,u.description
-- ,us.scopeid

FROM   mob_sandbox.unit u, mob_sandbox.unitScope us
WHERE us.unitId = u.unitId
AND us.scopeId = 2
ORDER BY u.name
```

find units that are unscoped (several old units are unscoped. revisit these, but filter out for now with unitid): 
```
SELECT u.unitId, u.quantityId, parentSI, siMultiplier,siConstant, deprecatedTo, deprecatedDueTo, u.name, abbreviation,u.description
,us.scopeid
FROM   mob_sandbox.unit u 
LEFT JOIN mob_sandbox.unitScope us
ON us.unitId = u.unitId
WHERE us.scopeId IS NULL AND u.unitId >= 1500
ORDER BY u.unitId
```

add scopes to units just added
```
INSERT INTO mob_sandbox.unitScope

SELECT u.unitId+4000, u.unitId, 32
FROM   mob_sandbox.unit u 
LEFT JOIN mob_sandbox.unitScope us
ON us.unitId = u.unitId
WHERE  us.scopeId IS NULL AND u.unitId >= 1500
ORDER BY u.unitId
```

# week of 2018-03-26
## export a list of units for EML 2.2
Goal: a set of units for EML 2.2 that can be reviewed, and edited if needed.
1. write a query
1. see if the STMML web service is easy to modify, to include deprecatedTo field
1. if not easy to modify, convert csv output to XML. 
  1. I think it will be easier to go csv > xml > stmml.

sql for a flat table (still needs join for deprecatedTo, deprecatedReason): 
```
SELECT q.name AS 'Quantity'
,u.unitId, u.name AS 'name', u.name AS 'id', u.parentSI AS 'parentSI',  u.siConstant AS 'constantToSI'
, u.siMultiplier AS 'multiplierToSI', u.abbreviation AS 'abbreviation'
, s.name AS 'Scope' 
FROM   mob_sandbox.quantity q, mob_sandbox.unit u, mob_sandbox.scope s, mob_sandbox.unitScope us
WHERE ( u.quantityId = q.quantityId and us.ScopeId = s.scopeId and us.unitId = u.unitId)
AND s.name LIKE 'EML-2.2%'
ORDER BY q.name
```




## archive the production DB

## replace production unitDB with your sandbox


